Turn it off. Do you have it off? It's on now. Turn it
off? Okay, if you could tell me a little bit about
the difference between the old and new towns. Just
start with the old town, what it was like. It's
going to be hard for me to tell how the old town was,
but it's 90% of the people that live in the old town,
they were Latin Americans. We had very few Anglo
Americans. And the old town is now underwater. We
had a big flood in, I think it was 1954.
And we moved just before that big flood in 1953
to this new town of Zapata.
The old town Zapata was the old courthouse there.
It was built in 1900.
And
now everything is underwater. Everything's
underwater. Well, how did it happen to be
underwater? In 1954,
a big flood came along the Rio Grande. And we all had
to move in a hurry.
Of course, we had here in these new towns, we had to
move some of the old buildings from the old town to
this new site here. But you already expected to
have to move. Oh, yes. We were advised by the
International Boundary and Water Commission
that the old town was going to be flooded. since
they were building that big dam, which is just,
say, about two miles from the county line of
Zapata. The dam is in Stark County. And we were
advised by the boundary commission that in the
first big flood, the town of Zapata would be
flooded, that we had to move, and we had to move. You
mean when the flood came, it was very quick? Yes, it
was very quick. How much time did you actually
have? Well, we had about, I'd say about three days.
Three days? Yeah.
How come people hadn't moved sooner? Well, I tell
you, some people, not all, but some people, they
thought that the old town would never be flooded.
Oh, really? They didn't believe. I'm not going to
say that all, but some of the people, they didn't
want to move. They just waited until the last
minute, I'll say. Well, had there been any effort
to save the town? Yes, there were made effort, but
not... They were not... We were about... They can
save the town. There were no way to save the town.
Now, did you get any kind of replacement for...
Yes, we were paid by the... government, by the U.S.
government, for our houses.
Before we go on,
why don't you say your name in here and how long
you've lived here? Well, I lived here all my life. I
was born in the county, and I've been living here
all my life, except for the a few months out of it,
but just working outside of the county. But I've
been living here in this county for all my life. And
your name is? Juventino Martinez. And so you
remember both the old town and the new town very
well. Yes, yes. Is life considerably different?
Well, not to us, not much different. To me, I won't
say to me, and I think to most of the people, it's
just about the same. We're just living in the
people that used to go out north to work. They still
do the same. They live here in the town. And they'll
go and stay about two or three months out of the
county, and they'll just come back, and they have
their homes here in Zapata. What percentage of the
people would you say do go work up north? Well, it's
not a very big percentage. I'd say about,
I don't think so, two or three percent. Two or
three, but that wouldn't be very many people. No,
no, no, not very many people. So most people stay
here all year? They stay here all year, yes. Well,
has there been any... Would you say that there have
been advantages in moving or disadvantages?
Well, I can tell you. Some people, I think it was an
advantage on account of this big lake. Some
people, they are doing good business because we
have a lot of people coming from outside, a lot of
tourists. Most
of it, every winter, they start coming in about, I
say in about September and October. The people
come from North Michigan, New Mexico, Arizona,
Ohio. And I say the, sometimes the two, I say about
1,000 people or maybe more. They stay about two,
three months. especially as retired people. So
this brings in some income that you get. Yeah, it
brings a lot of income. But we lost, on account of
building this dam, the county lost, I say, about
4,000 or 5,000 acres that were irrigation. Well,
that's a lot of land. Yeah, a lot of land, yes. I say
about, I don't know, I say, I want to say about from
2,000 to 3,000 acres. Well, has it been possible to
put another 2,000 or 3,000 acres back into
irrigation? I don't think so, ma'am. We don't
have, you know, the riverbed. It was just level
land. It was beautiful land for irrigation.
Right. We didn't have any trouble at all. I didn't
own any land, but the people that owned the land,
they had a lot of good land for irrigation. Now,
since the... Water covered all that land. Now most
of the out-country is now hilly country. I see. And
what about the soil? Well, the soil is very good.
But it would be very lot of trouble to level that
land to irrigate. Of course, we have on the north
part of the county, I say from here, we got a lot of
good land for irrigation too. And we don't have the
water now. You don't have the water? No, ma'am.
With all the water in your lake? All the water in the
lake belongs to the state or to the U.S.
government. And you have to get a permission, and
sometimes they don't give you enough water. Well,
what about people who already had those lands
under irrigation by then? Well, some of those
people, I think they lost their— Their water
rights? Their water rights. And there's not
anything they can do? I don't know. Unless they go
back to the state commission, water commission.
So this is one of the disadvantages. Yes, ma'am.
The loss of both the flatlands and the water. The
water, yes. The irrigation on those lands. They
used to raise a lot of tomatoes, onions, cotton,
good cane, corn. We don't have that anymore. We
have a little smaller irrigation from San
Ignacio. That's next town from here. They have
irrigation over there. San Ignacio didn't have to
move, did it? No, they didn't have to move. They
tried to move that town too, but they finally
decided that they didn't have to move. Was this
town a lot like San Ignacio before? Yes. Yes, well,
more or less the same. What about social life?
Going from farming to reliance on tourism, has
that affected life here in any way? Well, I don't
know. It didn't affect me much because I've only
been working in the courthouse most of my time. I
used to work with the county clerk. I'm still here
with the county clerk. You're with the county
clerk? No, I'm not working with him anymore. I quit
about four months ago. I resigned. I'm retired
now. Oh, you're retired. I'm too old to work. I
still do a little work. I don't want to just stay
home and lay down. I'd like to do something. What
about the young people? Are they staying here now?
Well, they are staying here. We have a very good
high school, very good elementary schools. And
those buildings, they are very nice. We didn't
have those in the old town. And with the help of the
US government, the schools are in very good shape.
We have very good, I say, teachers, very good
teachers. Most of them, they have their degrees,
master degrees. Are they mostly people from here,
or are they from other places? Well, mostly from
here, and just very few from outside.
Now, Guerrero, across the river, was also
relocated, wasn't it? Yeah, it was relocated.
That old town was built, I'd say, about 220 years
ago. It was an old Spanish town, built of sand
rocks, narrow streets. And
now they have a new modern town. The difference
between the government, the Mexican and the
American government, that the Mexican
government built their houses in the new
Guerrero, and they were just given to those
people, those people that moved to the new
Guerrero. So everybody got a new house. Everybody
got a new house. All those that own houses in old
Guerrero, they went and got one in the new
Guerrero. What about the people from Zapata? We
had to build our own. We just got the money, and we
had to build our own. Which do you think was better?
Well, I don't know. I think the money was better.
The money was there. Of course, I don't know. I
don't know. It's just a matter of thinking,
really. Maybe. I really don't know. Some of those
people, they had very beautiful houses there. The
ones here? No. No, the ones over there? Yes. They
got very beautiful houses? Yes, some of them got
beautiful brick houses. Were they satisfied with
their houses? Some were satisfied and some were
not. That's the difference. Over here, the same
thing. Some were satisfied with the money. With
the money, some were not satisfied. So if you were
going to say you were on a planning commission and
you had to help the government decide what to do if a
town was being moved because of a dam, what would
you recommend? Having seen it done two different
ways. Well, I tell you, I was working with the
boundary commission at that time. Oh, you were?
Yes. I was employed by the boundary commission for
that purposes. I used to go house by house with the
people, advising them that they had to move
because the town of Zapata would be flooded. And
some people believed me, and some they said, no,
you're crazy. This town will never be flooded.
Although Zapata had actually been flooded twice,
even without a dam, had been moved twice. No, when
it was moved twice, the oldest... The oldest. The
oldest, it was named not Zapata, it was named
Carrizo. It was flooded. And in 1900, moved to
this, to a new site, which is now, we call it the old
site now. Then it's flooded again. Yeah, it's
flooded again. And I hope we're not going to get
flooded again here. Because the tables had been
moved once without a dam, and then we moved again.
Who were the first families that moved into
Zapata? I guess we moved most everybody at the same
time. Oh, oh, to New Zapata. I was thinking about
Carizo. Well, I don't know much. It goes back a long
way. Long ways back. I don't know much about that.
Because in the old Carrizo, there were the
Redmonds. I don't remember. But I think the
Redmonds were the first to build the old Carrizo,
Redmond. And there were a lot of people. I don't
know who they were.
But then the news about that, everybody pretty
much, you mean everybody waited until the flood of
54? Almost. Yes, just about. And were there any
houses here for people to live in? Yes, there were
some. Who had built those? No, no, we moved some of
the old houses. Oh, you moved some of the old
houses? And some people, especially from below
here. There was the Lo Peña Village and all those
small villages below Zapata. They were flooded
before the old town Zapata, and those people
didn't have houses. The government lent those
people tents. They were living in tents. Good
heavens. How long did they live in tents? Well,
some lived about two, three months. Some lived
four, five months, some six months. And most of
those people, they were the Red Cross. Did a lot of
good help to those people. They were furnished
with tents and with food. for some time now.
How much warning did you have that you were going to
have to move in the first place? Well, we had long,
many times we were warned. No, many times. Many
times, yes. It wasn't really unexpected. And it
was, I was instructed to tell the people
that they have to be moved. Say, no, we are not They
finally, when they saw that the old town of La Pena,
which is about 18 miles below here, was flooded,
then they start doing something to, because if we
had a lot in the old town,
they had this new town here, and they built the
subdivision. And we had to trade lots. If I had a lot
in the old town, they gave me a lot in the new town.
And I start doing that with the people. I start
trading lots with those people. That was my duty at
that time. That was my work, the work I was doing.
Well, now, Mercurio Martinez Sr. from Laredo was
also doing that, wasn't he? Yes, he, Mercurio
Martinez, myself, and we had another old man from
Lo Peño that we all worked together. Did you know
Mercurio Martinez? Oh, I knew him very well. What
kind of He was a very nice person. He was very
well-educated. Have you seen his book, The
Kingdom of Zapata? Yes, I've seen The Kingdom of
Zapata. I think my name's in that book. I can't
recall right now. It had a lot of names, but I'll
look back through it. Maybe. I'm not sure, but I
think my name's in it. I think it probably
is. I'm not sure what my name's in that book, but I
think it probably is. Well, would you say that
things have changed more here than they have in San
Ignacio? Yes, it has changed more here. Do you
think that's because of moving? Yes, because of
moving, and now we have more people. We
have a lot more people living in this new town now.
And on account of the time, we have more people
living and we have more business
than now. Well, thank you very much. I'm pretty
sure he gives you a lot of information, because I
know. Oh, I hope so. How do you think? Do you think
he's still around? Well, I don't know. But he is
just about half a block from here. Well, would it be
all right if we just go by his house? I'm pretty
sure. This is very nice. Mary, would you get the
plug for me? Mr. San Miguel, could you give me his
address? How might I find it? Here.
Okay.
Thank
you.